+++
title = "Evaluation of Electronic Noses for Online Control of Odour Emissions from Sewer Systems"
date = 2010-01-01
authors = ["Therese Schwarzboeck", "Jan Waschnewski", "Michaela Frey", "rouault", "gnirss"]
publication_types = ["2"]
abstract = "The Berliner Wasserbetriebe are the largest water supply and wastewater disposal company in Germany. They are challenged to tackle various kinds of odour problems emerging from the sewer network.  The continuous extension of sewer networks and a decrease in water consumption (in Berlin: ~ 20 % in the last 16 years, according to the statistical office BB, 2009) have led to elevated odour emissions arising from sewer systems. Together with growing public concern over odours from water treatment works, this has led to increasing numbers of odour complaints in urban catchments (Stuetz and Frechen, 2001; ATV-DVWK-M 154, 2003; Barjenbruch, 2003).  Different odour abatement technologies are widely-used but often response only after consumer complaints and do not consider adequate identification of odour problems beforehand. An operational, together with a scientific approach is necessary in order to apply effective measures or combinations thereof. In Berlin annually almost 3 Mio € are spent by BWB to reduce odour emissions from the Berlin sewer system (BWB, 2006). Applied measures vary from dosing of nitrate or iron hydroxide sludge, flushing, or compensation by means of bio-filters or masking. The quantification of odour by means of continuous odour monitoring solutions such as electronic noses can contribute to minder economic and operational risks in odour management. The paper presents the research project ODOCO-ARTNOSE, dealing with the evaluation of electronic noses for the online application in sewer systems. The KompetenzZentrum Wasser Berlin (research centre) in cooperation with the Berlin water utilities Berliner Wasserbetriebe and Veolia Water will carry out bench tests with selected, commercially available chemosensor arrays to identify advanced applications of electronic noses in odour management in sewer networks.  Objectives of the project are to analytically assess the online-ability of electronic noses by means of a multi-criteria methodology and to specify future odour control services based on the application of e-noses in sewer networks. The potential of electronic noses will be evaluated as tool to fulfil certain needs, namely o	Support for planning/designing of odour preventive measures and abatement strategies. o	Support for real-time odour control. o	Data acquisition tool to supervise and document (industrial) dischargers, document the effect of abatement measures and document legal compliance.  Tests are possible to be carried out in the frame of a sewer research plant or within the sewer system of Berlin. A large-scale research plant was developed by Berliner Wasserbetriebe for investigating different odour and corrosion strategies. The plant consists of 2 independent gravity lines and is fed by combined wastewater from Berlin, pumped directly from the sewer. Various milieu conditions can be generated.  The paper places current challenges within the city of Berlin into perspective and displays examples of odour abatement strategies of Berliner Wasserbetriebe. Expected outcomes and correlated benefits of the project will be presented. The methodological approach relies on a transparent selection of chemosensor array systems, on bench tests following a sophisticated measurement program and the evaluation of the electronic noses by clear defined criteria. "
selected = false
publication = "*Chemical Engineering Transactions*"
doi = "http://dx.doi.org/10.3303/CET1023000"
projects = ["odocoartnose"]
+++

